#BLE for Developers

This document is written for experienced BLE developers who are switching to mbed platforms. If you feel that you need more information than this document provides, please refer to our [extended documentation](/GettingStarted/DesignersIntro/).

##BLE on mbed

[mbed](http://developer.mbed.org) gives you three things: a platform, APIs for that platform, and an online compiler:

1. Some platforms require an external BLE component, and [some](http://developer.mbed.org/platforms/mbed-HRM1017/) [have it](http://developer.mbed.org/platforms/RedBearLab-BLE-Nano/) [built-in](http://developer.mbed.org/platforms/Nordic-nRF51-Dongle/).

2. mbed has a BLE-specific API ([BLE_API](http://developer.mbed.org/teams/Bluetooth-Low-Energy/code/BLE_API/file/1956023d42fb/README.md)), a high level abstraction for using BLE on multiple platforms.
	
3. BLE, like all other mbed capabilities, can be programmed in C++ on the [mbed Compiler](https://developer.mbed.org/compiler/).

___

##Event-Driven Programming

mbed programming is event-driven: it responds to interrupts coming from the hardware, generated by changes in electrical signals or system activity (such as radio communication). Interrupts often lead to the execution of event handlers by the OS. In the context of BLE, event handlers may be triggered quite regularly, for example if a sensor sends a measurement every x seconds, or they may be triggered intermittently.

Event handlers are often preemptive, meaning they can interrupt the main program’s execution to force their own execution; the main program will resume when the interrupting event is fully handled. In the case of BLE, we expect the main program to be a sleep loop (waitForEvent), which means that the device will sleep unless it receives an interrupt - which is why BLE is a low energy technology.

The relationship between main() and event handlers - and especially the decision which code to move to an event handler and which to leave in main() - is all about timing. Handler execution time is often determined not by the size of the code but by how many times it must run - for example, how many iterations of a data-processing loop it performs - or by communication with external components such as sensors (also called polling). Communication delays can range from a few microseconds to milliseconds, depending on the sensor involved. Reading an accelerometer can take around a millisecond, and a temperature sensor can take up to a few hundred microseconds. A barometer, on the other hand, can take up to 10 milliseconds to yield a new sensor value. 

If an event, such as a sensor reading, arrives when the program is in main() (in our case, then, when the device is sleeping), it can be executed. But if it arrives when another event is being executed, it may have to wait for the first event to be handled in full. In this scenario, the first event is blocking the execution of the second event. Because event handlers can block each other, they are supposed to execute quickly and return control to main(), to allow the system to remain responsive. In the world of microcontrollers, anything longer than a few dozen microseconds is too long and a millisecond is an eternity. Long-running activities - anything longer than 100 microseconds, such as data processing and sensor communication - should be left in main() rather than an event handler. This is because main() can then be interrupted by event handlers, so that the long-running process doesn’t affect the system’s responsiveness. 

In these cases, the event handler is used not to perform functions but rather to enqueue work for the main loop. In the heart rate demo, the work of polling for heart rate data is communicated to the main loop through the variable **triggerSensorPolling**, which gets set periodically from an event handler called **periodicCallback()**.

_____

##Fast Prototyping

mbed is designed for fast prototyping, but implementing BLE brings with it a complication: the need to prototype interactivity. If you’re trying to showcase your project, you want to avoid the compatibility issues you may have with mobile apps and minimize the time you spend on polishing an app that may never be used.

So if you're in the prototyping phase, there are three easier ways to allow user interaction:

1. Hardware inputs directly to the BLE device, for example a [touchscreen](http://developer.mbed.org/components/cat/touchscreen/).

2. Websites that provide a standard user interface and send commands back to the device. They require programming, but they usually work well on all phones and tablets.

3. [Evothings Studio](http://evothings.com/getting-started-with-evothings-studio-in-90-seconds/) lets you create simple apps that are run from the Evothings App on your phone, so Evothings does the compatibility work for you. It requires some learning of its own, but it may well be worth your time.

Once your prototype is approved, you can invest some more time in your user input. At this point, apps may become worthwhile. But, if you want to be part of the Physical Web, stick to a website - and use the BLE device just to advertise the site's URL.

___

##BLE in Depth

If you want more information about how BLE works, see our [BLE in Depth document](/InDepth/BLEInDepth/). 

___

##Quick Samples

**Tip:** The quick samples are written for experienced BLE developers with an understanding of the mbed IDE; if you want more information about the IDE, see the [tutorials](/GettingStarted/IntroSamples/), which offer extended versions of the same samples. 

The samples cover:

1. A [URI Beacon](#uribeaconsample).
	
2. A [heart rate monitor](hearratesample).
	
3. [Service creation](#servicecreation): for a read-only characteristic and for a read/write characteristic.

____

<a name="uribeaconsample">
##Quick Sample One: URI Beacon
</a>

**Tip:** If you don’t know how to register your board, or how to work with the mbed compiler, please see the [extended URI Beacon tutorial](/GettingStarted/URIBeacon/). 

To get this sample working, you'll need:

+ To see BLE devices and their advertisement or beacon information, get *one* of the following installed on your phone: 

	-  The physical web app. You can get that app for [iOS](https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/physical-web/id927653608?mt=8) and for 
[Android](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=physical_web.org.physicalweb).

	- For Android, you can get [nRF Master Control Panel](https://play.google.com/store/apps/detailsid=no.nordicsemi.android.mcp&hl=en).

	- For iPhone, you can get [LightBlue](https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/lightblue-bluetooth-low-energy/id557428110?mt=8).

+ A BLE-enabled mbed board.

+ A user on [developer.mbed.org](developer.mbed.org) to see the compiler.

If you’re familiar with mbed and our compiler, you can get the beacon working in just a few minutes:

1. Open the compiler and select or add your board.

2. Import the [BLE_URIBeacon](http://developer.mbed.org/teams/Bluetooth-Low-
Energy/code/BLE_URIBeacon/) program.

3. In main.cpp, find the line *nrfURIBeaconConfigService uriBeaconConfig(ble, **"http://www.mbed.org"**);* and edit the URL. Note that it's limited to 30 characters, with “http://” and “www.” each counting as one.

5. Compile the code. It will be downloaded to your Downloads folder (on some browsers you may need to specify a download location).

6. Drag and drop the compiled file to your board.

7. On the app you installed on your phone, discover your beacon and check that the URL is correct.

____

<a name="hearratesample">
##Quick Sample Two: Heart Rate
</a>

**Tip:** If you don’t know how to register your board, or how to work with the mbed compiler, please see the [extended URI Beacon tutorial](/GettingStarted/URIBeacon/). 

To see the heart rate information on your phone, download PanoBike for [iOS](https://itunes.apple.com/gb/app/panobike/id567403997?mt=8) or [Android](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.topeak.panobike&hl=en). Then:

1. Open the compiler and select or add your board.

2. Import the [heart rate service](http://developer.mbed.org/teams/Bluetooth-Low-Energy/code/BLE_HeartRate/).

3. In main.cpp, find the line *const static char     DEVICE_NAME[]        = **"Nordic_HRM"**;* and change the beacon's name from Nordic_HRM. 

4. Compile the code. It will be downloaded to your Downloads folder (on some browsers you may need to specify a download location).

5. Drag and drop the compiled file to your board.

6. On the PanoBike application, watch the heart rate. It should go from 100 to 175 in increments of one, then reset.
